---
layout: post
title: "Where does media art fit within the arts? OR: Is New media / Game Arts / Digital Art a Fine Art, or Ain't It?"
categories: [academia, media art, art, pedagogy, creative code, programming, games]
---

I began writing this post less than an hour after getting rejected for an arts fellowship I applied to. To avoid this being a gripe or rant I've captured my initial thoughts that were top of mind but then I've waited a couple hours before finishing writing this to make sure it's tempered with more expansive and generous thoughts.

In today's case, like most things I apply to, the rejection email did not provide any feedback guidance so I am speculating without having a ton of data. As part of the application process I had met with the org director, so I have at least some knowledge that I was a good fit, and based on some research, I believe the issue was the classic one I've dealt with a number of times: is my artwork contextualized as *fine* art like sculpture, painting, poetry? Or is it not? 

To be clear, there were likely dozens of applications for this fellowship and far less accepted. I could have had a weaker application, or not fit their needs. Or many other reasons. And since they provide no feedback on the app I do not know why I was rejected. I also think it's normal and okay to go through this process. I shouldn't be accepted to a fellowship just because I think I was a good applicant! That's for them to decide. But based on a hunch I am wondering this time if it's because I present as a "media artist" with currently many game arts projects that are experimental narrative works but to someone that hasn't thought much about games as medium, it might look like any old generic video game to them. Or else too out-of-the-box, too not traditionally art for them. And when that feeling happens - it's common! - I start to ruminate. Thus this blog post.

Let's start with self-identification as an artist. I'm trying to write about the phenomenon that most of us working with a computer to make our art are seen as outside of traditional fine arts media. I'm encompassing those working on the computer primarily to make their art who may identify as "media artists", "new media artist", working in "game arts", "digital art", "computational art" and many other related terms. Or we're just "artists." My bio on my website says "artist" for example. And this is absolutely not a new issue, and not even necessarily different from similar boundaries thrown up between fine art versus craft for example, or anywhere folks patrol the edges of discipline.

Straight up, for artists working in digital media, some see our work as outside of the bounds of art shown in mainstream arts settings.  This isn't confined to the domain of residency/fellowship/grants but of course at all levels. I have a MFA from a "Design Media Arts" graduate program at UCLA, which is housed within its art school but considered separate from its Arts MFA, with different professors and cohort of students artificially kept apart even when our actual art production looks very similar. This came up for example when I was unable to take a class with *institutional critique* artist Andrea Fraser. How did THAT become *fine art* for a MFA but *game arts* hasn't yet? Is it because games largely wanted to be accepted as mainstream, but *critique* by its nature did not, even while being exhibited within them before becoming appropriated as another product for display and sale at commercial galleries? 

Rather than answer this, I'll describe how years ago I got fired up and co-created the Babycastles _untitled_-in-residency program. I found financial support through outside donors to pay our selected artists through that program. We made the residency as open as possible, and helped applicants step through the application process. Of course, there was the same problem of 120+ applicants for maybe 6 or 7 open spots, but we put in over a dozen hours of work reviewing applications, provided feedback, alternative funding/grant info, and other opportunities for exhibiting work or taking free workshops. And let me pause here and say a *traditional* media artist like a sculptor or poet not working digitally in any way may have had difficulty being accepted, though I believe we did accept at least one farmer/zinester. We were looking to sweep in those working on and around the digital/art boundaries, especially with an overlap in experimental game arts, because we saw a need to support this type of artist and build a stronger community. It was extremely effective, and I'm proud of our work doing it.

In the art collective I've been part of for a decade I'd like to think we blur and break boundaries, but I'm probably biased and overlooking where these may lie. We have sculptors, installation artists, parade-makers, musicians, hackers building solar-powered sound installations, interactive artists, social-engaged public art practice, a "light artist", performance artists, and more. Yes, we have poets too! And ceramicists! I don't feel 'other' or un-welcome there. We're all interdisciplinary and open to thinking expansively. In addition to blurring or discarding the boundaries of medium or genre we also blur and problematize authorship. In my tenure review one of the anonymous reviewers noted that it was hard to judge this collaborative work from a *peer review* lens, and so they skipped reviewing it!

Some of the most successful artists working in computational or digital media that I know, in terms of mainstream art careers, are those that have been able to present their work as solidly within the arts. Over a decade ago as I was moving from socially-engaged art practice, itself also an arts discipline on the margins, into game arts and interactive or computational art, I was advised by an artist colleague who was the chair of an Ivy League school's art department not to work with game engines, code-based art and the like. He himself was making institutional critique work, socially-engaged public art, but then there was always a sellable output: large photographs and sculpture documenting or about the *social engagement.* His work didn't move me. But it was institutionally supported. And how. It was packaged, exhibited and sold. He was by many measures a *success*.

This artist told me explicitly my work as a media artist wouldn't be accepted by the mainstream art community. And why turn my back on that? The conversation ticked me off. It's been over a decade and I still think about it. I'm a tenured professor in a new media department, at a school I enjoy, with great students and faculty. But I revisit this conversation periodically.

A few paragraphs up I did the tapdance explaining how at my art community we blur boundaries and kumbaya interdisciplinarity, but if I'm being real I feel pretty negative about a majority of institutionally-supported mainstream art. It's why I initially moved toward this exciting fuzzy interdiciplinary, emergent, experimental realm of media art, and why I continue to mostly find it 'home' today. In the mid-2010s as I was getting more and more turned off by appropriation of *soft sculpture*, a new *relational aesthetics*, and the turn from activist art and *social practice* to *creative placemaking* I moved away from it. Sure, artists have to eat. They want an audience, community, and ideally some public recognition. But I thought much of the work under the loose *social practice* umbrella had lost its power, its bite. This was about the time when I began learning to program, making experimental games. It also coincides around the time of the publication of Anna Anthropy's [Rise of the Videogame Zinesters](https://www.sevenstories.com/books/3459-rise-of-the-videogame-zinesters), a powerhouse of a book that kickstarted a whole new generation of experimental game makers wielding a young medium - stretching, breaking, and deconstructing the form of games, disrupting their recent hardening into the province solely of professional AAA games and the new professional "indie" game movement.

I would be lying if I didn't admit to some of the advantages of being both within and outside of the mainstream art community, whatever that may mean. My colleagues and I often like this position: we are related to the mainstream arts but have some distance from it. We flirt with it, sometimes situate within it when it serves us, but we also flit away or scrape off parts we don't align with. Sometimes it works in our favor, and sometimes not. In addition to the negatively read idea that those of us with various technical skills (coding, 3d modeling, video editing, web design) must not be real artists, there's also the notion that working in games is more of a medium of *entertainment* than a medium like opera (or theater or film!) that encompasses a full spectrum of disciplines and opportunities for creative expression, from sound design, narrative, staging, lighting, soundtrack/music, experiments in time, and interaction. 

I don't have a call to action here. I'm just thinking out loud and reacting, disappointed when I feel like my work is not visibly accepted within the art canon, then reminding myself how pulling away from the center has also served the work and our spirit. 

And should I be complaining? At this point I've received a lot of support over the years, and worked with others to build our own networks of support and community. In fact, it's probably one of the strongest things I've been doing. As I've been part of the field for so long I've been an active organizer and helped to build out support for many others, from organizing conferences, bringing in guest artists to my institutions, raising funding for artist spaces, mentoring and hiring younger artists, teaching and organizing free professional and artist skill workshops, documenting and archiving alternative artist communities, and collaborating with people in a range of backgrounds and experiences. And teaching a new generation of students skills, history, while trying to tell alternative and forgotton histories and add critical perspectives - through pedagogy and through my podcast. And I haven't even gotten to the part about building new tools for creative expression, for fun, for use, and as a form of expression and empowerment.

I'm leaving aside for today a discussion on the limitations of media art as a useful term, along with the various fields of media production in the fine arts, experimental game arts and the like. As well, it's useful to reflect on the problems of organizing around specific technology, on its use as a gimmick or a tool of capitalist production. These are important critiques and discussion points. And some of this I've picked up for collaborative communal response, using the framework of permacomputing to consider some of the environmental and social costs and considerations of our tools and media ecosystem.

But I think I will pause for now. I started this post with something like a gripe or rant, reflected on my medium and place within the arts, then ended in a space of empowerment, and pointed to critique and ongoing considerations and a community of practice. Seems like the right way to end it here for now! And then pick myself up, apply to more opportunities, and to build more support in community, and with friends. 

